# Welcome to Neatline!

This guide is designed to be a comprehensive introduction to the Neatline project. We'll walk through the basic steps of installing and configuring Neatline, creating exhibits and records, importing items from your Omeka collection, and publishing your projects to the web. Towards the end, we'll also discuss some more advanced workflows and techniques that can be used to modify Neatline's build-in feature set - adding custom base layers, creating custom themes for individual exhibits, and using a Neatline-flavored dialect of CSS to manage large collections of geospatial information.

## What is Neatline?

In the broadest sense, Neatline is an annotation framework that makes it possible to create rich, interactive editions of visual objects. In the past, the project has focused on maps, but Neatline can also be used to annotate anything that has some sort of two-dimensional, visual instantiation. The same set of vector-drawing and content management tools can also be used to create interpretive views of paintings, drawings, photographs, documents, diagrams, and anything else that can be captured as an image.

Here are some examples of the kinds of projects that could be built (or have been built!) with Neatline:

  - **Wordsworth in the Alps**: Book Sixth of _The Prelude_, "Cambridge and the Alps," describes Wordsworth's 1790 grand tour of Europe, culminating in a famous series of passages describing the crossing of Simplon Pass in the Alps. You want to create an interactive edition of the book that traces Wordsworth's journey from Cambridge across the channel to Calais, southward through France, and then into the Alps and along the Stockalper trail over the pass. How does Wordsworth's description of the sequence of towns and landmarks map onto the actual geography of the area?

  - **The (Digital) Declaration of Independence**: The signatures at the bottom of the Declaration of Independence are iconic - we can all recognize John Hancock and Thomas Jefferson, but what about the rest? You want to create an interactive edition of the document that traces out visual annotations around each of the signatures that connects it to a short biography - who they were, where they came from, and how they ended up signing the declaration. With the signatories in place, you then provide a transcription of the declaration itself, and link the individual sentences or words in the text to the corresponding locations on the high-resolution scan of the original document.

  - **Minard's Graph of Napoleon's Invasion of Russia**: Lous Minard's 1869 diagram showing the gradual depletion of Napleon's army over the course of the 1812 invasion of Russia is one of the seminal documents of information design. You want to take high-resolution scan of Minard's original graphic, overlay it on top of modern satellite geoegraphy, and layer on a rich, interactive reimagination of the original material - trace out the components of Mianrd's flowchart, add defail about each of the cities and rivers marked along the route, and link individual objets on the map with corresponding paragraph and sentence annotations in a long-form narrative that describes the history of the invasion.

  - **Whitman's "Salut au Monde"**: In _Leaves of Grass_, "Salut au Monde" (Salute to the World) is an of index of Whitman's geographic imagination, an expansive catalog of cities, countries, regions, landmarks, oceans, rivers, and cultures. You want to create a rich interactive edition of the poem by layering the actual text on top of modern satellite imagery and connecting each of the of geospatial references to hand-selected (and at times highly interpretive) focus locations on the map - the "Amazon" to the expansive, dark green rainforests in Brazil, the "northern blasts" to the glaciers in the Brooks Range, etc.

  - **Hotchkiss at Chancellorsville**: Jedediah Hotchkiss, a military cartographer for the Confederacy during the Civil War, printed a series of three identical engravings of the area surrounding the Chancellorsville crossroads in northern Virginia, and then sketched in the positions of the troops on each of the three days of the Battle of Chancellorsville with colored pencils. You want to create an exhibit that positions the three maps on top of modern satellite imagery of the battle field and layers on a second layer of visual annotation and interpretive information about the battle - the movement to battle, Lee's risky decision to split his army in half and leave part of his force behind at Fredericksburg, why Jackson decided to perform a risky flanking maneuver on the morning of the first day, and how the events at Chancellorsville fit into the larger progression of the war.

  - **The Chelyabinsk Meteor**: On Febuary 15, 2013, a 10,000-ton meteor streaked over the city of Chelyabinsk in the Ural Mountains, resulting in a massive airbust that shattered windows and collapsed buildings. The explosion occurred during the morning rush hour, and the event was captured by dozens of commuters with dashboard-mounted video cameras. You want to create an exhibit that plots out the trajectory of the meteor as it enters the atmosphere and traverses the airspace over the city, and plot out the exact position and orientation of each of the video recordings relative to the actual location of the airburst.

## What Makes it Different?

How does Neatline fit into the existing ecosystem of geospatial and annotation tools? Neatline sits in the space between consumer-grade mapping applications like the Google custom map-maker and heavyweight, analytical GIS tools like ArcGIS. It's designed to be simple enough that college undergradutes can easily use it for class assignments, but also sufficiently flexible, scalable, and feature-rich that it can be used for professional scholarship, journalism, and art. Neatline keeps things simple and provides sensible defaults, but it's careful never to make aesthetic or intellectual decisions on your behalf.

## Help Us Improve the Guide

As you read through the documentation, if you find anything that's unclear, incomplete, or incorrect be sure to file a support ticket on the project's [issue tracker](https://github.com/scholarslab/Neatline/issues) on GitHub, and we'll do our best to fix the problem!
